# NBA_MVP
What factors are the best predictors of who will win the MVP award in a given year? 
How can I best predict the MVP winner?

As an aspiring basketball analyst, I decided to structure my project around the NBA. I have always been curious how sportsbooks create the odds for certain events, like who will win the Most Valuable Player (MVP) award and would like to see if I too can reliably predict the winner of that award. What makes this goal particularly engaging and challenging is the lack of certainty surrounding the award’s definition. The NBA has no formal definition for the award or qualifications that the candidates must meet to earn votes. A group of panelists, made up of sportscasters and reporters from the United States and Canada, meet and give votes to the players they believe deserve MVP. They rank their top five candidates, with the first-place vote counting for 10 points, the second-place vote counting for seven, the third counting for five, the fourth counting for three, and the fifth counting for one. The winner is the player with the most total points from voting (Corvo). This is also the player with the highest award share. Award share is defined as the number of points a player receives from voting divided by the total possible points from first-place votes (Yoo). Although the voting system has been standardized since the 1980-81 season, the criteria for these votes are far from defined. The panelists crown the winner at their discretion.
Each year, there is considerable debate about who should win the award and what winning means. Some contend that it should be given to the best player in the league. Some argue that it should be the most valuable to their team. Others think it should be the best player on a great team. Still others support a heavily qualitative approach that gives the award to a great player with the best narrative, like leading a weak team to the playoffs or returning from injury. Within each of these arguments, a multitude of additional questions arise. How does one define the best player? What statistics would you use? Are there certain individual statistics that matter more than others? Is there a win threshold that a team must meet for its players to be considered? Questions like these abound in the basketball world, but I would like to see if I can surmount this uncertainty and find a combination of variables that accurately predicts the MVP.

The primary research question driving my project is: what factors are the best predictors of who will win the most valuable player award in a given year? I am also interested in accurately predicting next year’s NBA MVP. Therefore, the secondary research question guiding my analysis is: which model provides the most accurate MVP predictions? My initial goal is to accurately predict a season’s MVP at the beginning of the season before any games are played, so I begin by utilizing statistics from the previous year to predict MVP candidacy. However, I will also explore predicting the MVP with current player statistics to make more reliable predictions. 

